[DOCS-4428] Add Custom Metrics Governance using Observability Pipelines (#16112)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/observability_pipelines/guide/custom-metrics-governance.md

---
title: Custom Metrics Governance with Observability Pipelines
kind: guide
aliases:
  - /metrics/custom_metrics/guide/custom-metrics-governance-drop-metrics-missing-specific-tags/
  - /integrations/observability_pipelines/guide/custom-metrics-governance-drop-metrics-missing-specific-tags/
  - /observability_pipelines/guide/custom-metrics-governance-drop-metrics-missing-specific-tags
further_reading:
- link: "/observability_pipelines/setup/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Set up Observability Pipelines"
---

## Overview

> Custom metrics provide visibility into all facets of your business, from application performance, infrastructure health, to business KPIs. In order to govern your custom metric volumes, Datadog offers several tools for cost visibility and control after your metrics are ingested, such as [estimated real-time custom metric usage][1], [usage attribution][2], and [Metrics without Limits™][3].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Custom metrics provide visibility into all facets of your business, from application performance, infrastructure health, to business KPIs. To govern your custom metric volumes, Datadog offers several tools for cost visibility and control after your metrics are ingested, such as [estimated real-time custom metric usage][1], [usage attribution][2], and [Metrics without Limits™][3].
```

> This guide walks you through how you can use Observability Pipelines to govern and control your custom metrics before they are ingested. More specifically, how to do the following: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide walks you through how to use Observability Pipelines to govern and control your custom metrics before they are ingested. More specifically, how to do the following: 
```

- [Drop custom metrics missing specific tags or the metric's namespace](#drop-metrics-missing-specific-tags-or-the-metrics-namespace)
- [Remove custom metric tags](#remove-custom-metric-tags)
- [Set up rules to prevent cardinality spikes](#prevent-cardinality-spikes)

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes that you have already set up Observability Pipelines, a tool for collecting, processing, and routing telemetry data. If you're not familiar with Observability Pipelines, see the [Setup][4] documentation and [Vector Remap Language][5] for more information.

## Drop metrics missing specific tags or the metric's namespace

### Problem

> It is useful to break down your overall metrics usage with the [Usage Attribution][6] feature, by adding tags like `team` or `application`. This lets you see how many custom metrics a particular team or application is generating. However, custom metrics might be submitted without those crucial tags. This makes it difficult to attribute the metrics back to the specific team, service, or application generating them. To prevent this issue, use Observability Pipelines to drop metrics missing tags that are useful for Usage Attribution. This can be done before the metrics are added to your account's custom metrics usage. 

Reviewer: I would consider moving everything after "To prevent this issue..." to the beginning of the Solution section. You're starting to describe the solution here, so I think it makes sense to have it instead be the first paragraph under the Solution heading.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, done! Also moved it for other section.

### Solution

> Observability Pipelines has a wide array of functions that can transform your metrics data before it is sent to Datadog. For example, you can use the `filter` transform to drop metrics that are missing specific tag keys. The following component filters out any metrics that do not have a `team_tag`, ensuring those metrics are dropped in your Observability Pipelines configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Observability Pipelines has a wide array of functions that can transform your metrics data before it is sent to Datadog. For example, use the `filter` transform to drop metrics that are missing specific tag keys. The following component filters out any metrics that do not have a `team_tag`, ensuring those metrics are dropped in your Observability Pipelines configuration.
```

```yaml
transforms:
  my_transform_id:
    type: filter
    inputs:
      - my-source-or-transform-id
    condition: |
      exists(.tags.<team_tag>)
```

Similarly, in cases where you want to filter out metrics by namespace instead of tags, use the following configuration.

```yaml
transforms:
  my_transform_id:
    type: filter
    inputs:
      - my-source-or-transform-id
    condition: |2
       .namespace == "foo" 
```
## Remove custom metric tags

### Problem

> Metrics tags can provide better visibility into specific hosts, pods, applications, and services. However, some metrics may have tags that are rarely queried or useful for your visualizations or investigative workflows. While you can use Metrics without Limits™ to exclude potential superfluous tags automatically (after a metric has been ingested), you can not drop tags on metrics (prior to metric ingestion) to prevent these tags from contributing towards your organization's ingested metrics usage. To address this issue, you can use Observability Pipelines to do any of the following before the metric is ingested:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics tags can provide better visibility into specific hosts, pods, applications, and services. However, some metrics may have tags that are rarely queried or useful for your visualizations or investigative workflows. While you can use Metrics without Limits™ to exclude potential superfluous tags automatically (after a metric has been ingested), you cannot drop tags on metrics (prior to metric ingestion) to prevent these tags from contributing towards your organization's ingested metrics usage. To address this issue, you can use Observability Pipelines to do one of the following before the metric is ingested:
```

- [Drop one tag](#solution-1-drop-one-tag)
- [Define an allowlist array of tags to keep](#solution-2-define-an-allowlist-array-of-tags-to-keep)
- [Define a blocklist array of tags to drop](#solution-3-define-a-blocklist-array-of-tags-to-drop)
- [Define an allowlist of valid tags in a Reference Table](#solution-4-define-an-allowlist-of-valid-tags-in-a-reference-table)

> **Note**: Removing tags on metrics prior to ingestion impacts the mathematical accuracy of your metrics' queries, while using Metrics without Limits™ allows you to define important tags at any time, without impacting the mathematical accuracy of your metrics' queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Removing tags on metrics prior to ingestion impacts the mathematical accuracy of your metrics' queries. Using Metrics without Limits™ allows you to define important tags at any time, without impacting the mathematical accuracy of your metrics' queries.
```

### Solution 1: Drop one tag

To drop specific tags on custom metrics before they get ingested into Datadog, you can use Observability Pipelines' [`remap` transform][7], which comes with a domain-specific language to manipulate metrics. 

> For the basic use case of dropping a single metric tag, you can use the `del()` function in VRL. For example, the following component drops the tag, `tag_to_drop`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the basic use case of dropping a single metric tag, you can use the `del()` function in VRL. For example, the following component drops the `tag_to_drop` tag.
```

```

### Solution 3: Define a blocklist array of tags to drop

In the case where you know which tags you want to drop, use the `filter()` function to define a blocklist of those tags. This is done by adding `!` to `includes(tags_blocklist, value)` from Solution 2.

```yaml
transforms:
  drop_excluded_tags:
    type: remap
    inputs:
      - dd_agent.metrics
    source: |2+

           # list of tags to keep
           tags_blocklist = ["tag 1", "tag 2", "tag 3", "tag 4"]

           # filter and drop any tags that don't match the tags in tags_to_keep
           .tags = [filter(.tags) -> |_index, value| { !includes(tags_blocklist, value)}
```

### Solution 4: Define an allowlist of valid tags in a Reference Table

In cases when you have a specific list of valid tags, you can use Observability Pipelines' `get_enrichment_tables` and `find_enrichment_tables` functions. This allows you to reference an enrichment table in `csv` format in Observability Pipelines. `csv` is the only supported file format. 

For this example, a `csv` file named `valid_tags.csv` contains the following valid tags:

```
tag_name
"tag 1"
"tag 2"
"tag 3"
"tag 4"
```

> To reference it as table, the following configuration must be set for the file `valid_tags.csv`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reference it as a table, the following configuration must be set for the file `valid_tags.csv`.
```

```
enrichment_tables:
  valid_tag_table:
    type: file
    file:
      path: /etc/vector/valid_tags.csv
      encoding:
        type: csv
    schema:
      tag_name: string
```

Once the `enrichment_tables` field is set, you can drop tags not included in the `valid_tags.csv` file using the following configuration:

```yaml
transforms:
  drop_excluded_tags:
    type: remap
    inputs:
      - dd_agent.metrics
    source: |2+
           # filter and drop any tags that don't match the tags in tags_to_keep
           .tags = [filter(.tags) -> |_index, value| {!is_empty(find_enrichment_table_records(valid_tag_table, value))}
```

## Prevent cardinality spikes

### Problem

> Your overall volume of custom metrics is dependent on the number of tag value combinations submitted to Datadog. See [Custom Metrics Billing][8] on count custom metrics are counted. It is possible for a particular tag key's cardinality to unintentionally spike. For example, the `path` tag usually has 100 unique tag values, but then suddenly spikes to 100,000 unique values. This sudden increase in tag cardinality can cause an increase in your overall custom metrics volumes. It can also potentially cause you to exceed your account allotment for custom metrics. To avoid this situation, you can set up rules in Observability Pipelines to prevent cardinality spikes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your overall volume of custom metrics is dependent on the number of tag value combinations submitted to Datadog. See [Custom Metrics Billing][8] to learn how custom metrics are counted. It is possible for a particular tag key's cardinality to unintentionally spike. For example, the `path` tag usually has 100 unique tag values, but then suddenly spikes to 100,000 unique values. This sudden increase in tag cardinality can cause an increase in your overall custom metrics volumes. It can also potentially cause you to exceed your account allotment for custom metrics. To avoid this situation, you can set up rules in Observability Pipelines to prevent cardinality spikes.
```

This guide walks you through how to use Observability Pipelines to govern and control your custom metrics before they are ingested. More specifically, how to do the following: 
- [Drop custom metrics missing specific tags or the metric's namespace](#drop-metrics-missing-specific-tags-or-the-metrics-namespace)
- [Remove custom metric tags](#remove-custom-metric-tags)
- [Set up rules to prevent cardinality spikes](#prevent-cardinality-spikes)

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes that you have already set up Observability Pipelines, a tool for collecting, processing, and routing telemetry data. If you're not familiar with Observability Pipelines, see the [Setup][4] documentation and [Vector Remap Language][5] for more information.

## Drop metrics missing specific tags or the metric's namespace

### Problem

> It is useful to break down your overall metrics usage with the [Usage Attribution][6] feature, by adding tags like `team` or `application`. This lets you see how many custom metrics a particular team or application is generating. However, custom metrics might be submitted without those crucial tags. This makes it difficult to attribute the metrics back to the specific team, service, or application generating them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is useful to break down your overall metrics usage with the [Usage Attribution][6] feature, by adding tags like `team` or `application`. The Usage Attribution feature lets you see how many custom metrics a particular team or application is generating. However, custom metrics might be submitted without those crucial tags. This makes it difficult to attribute the metrics back to the specific team, service, or application generating them. 
```

### Solution

> To prevent that issue, use Observability Pipelines to drop metrics missing tags that are useful for Usage Attribution. This can be done before the metrics are added to your account's custom metrics usage. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To prevent that issue, use Observability Pipelines to drop metrics missing tags that are meaningful to you. This can be done prior to metric ingestion and therefore before metrics contribute to your account's custom metrics usage. 
```

Observability Pipelines has a wide array of functions that can transform your metrics data before it is sent to Datadog. For example, use the `filter` transform to drop metrics that are missing specific tag keys. The following component filters out any metrics that do not have a `team_tag`, ensuring those metrics are dropped in your Observability Pipelines configuration.

```yaml
transforms:
  my_transform_id:
    type: filter
    inputs:
      - my-source-or-transform-id
    condition: |
      exists(.tags.<team_tag>)
```

Similarly, in cases where you want to filter out metrics by namespace instead of tags, use the following configuration.

```yaml
transforms:
  my_transform_id:
    type: filter
    inputs:
      - my-source-or-transform-id
    condition: |2
       .namespace == "foo" 
```
## Remove custom metric tags

### Problem

> Metrics tags can provide better visibility into specific hosts, pods, applications, and services. However, some metrics may have tags that are rarely queried or useful for your visualizations or investigative workflows. While you can use Metrics without Limits™ to exclude potential superfluous tags automatically (after a metric has been ingested), you cannot drop tags on metrics (prior to metric ingestion) to prevent these tags from contributing towards your organization's ingested metrics usage. To address this issue, you can use Observability Pipelines to do one of the following **before the metric is ingested**:

Reviewer 2: For reason the bolded "before the metric is ingested" isn't appearing in my preview as a FYI

Author: Thanks, this should be in the preview now!

- [Drop one tag](#solution-1-drop-one-tag)
- [Define an allowlist array of tags to keep](#solution-2-define-an-allowlist-array-of-tags-to-keep)
- [Define a blocklist array of tags to drop](#solution-3-define-a-blocklist-array-of-tags-to-drop)
- [Define an allowlist of valid tags in a Reference Table](#solution-4-define-an-allowlist-of-valid-tags-in-a-reference-table)

> **Note**: Removing tags on metrics prior to ingestion impacts the mathematical accuracy of your metrics' queries. Using Metrics without Limits™ allows you to define important tags at any time, without impacting the mathematical accuracy of your metrics' queries.

Reviewer 2: Can we move this Note a bit earlier to be right before the sentence:  "To address this issue, you can use Observability Pipelines to do one of the following **before the metric is ingested**:"

### Solution 1: Drop one tag

> To drop specific tags on custom metrics before they get ingested into Datadog, you can use Observability Pipelines' [`remap` transform][7], which comes with a domain-specific language to manipulate metrics. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To drop a specific tag on custom metrics before they get ingested into Datadog, you can use Observability Pipelines' [`remap` transform][7], which comes with a domain-specific language to manipulate metrics. 
```

In cases when you have a specific list of valid tags, you can use Observability Pipelines' `get_enrichment_tables` and `find_enrichment_tables` functions. This allows you to reference an enrichment table in `csv` format in Observability Pipelines. `csv` is the only supported file format. 

For this example, a `csv` file named `valid_tags.csv` contains the following valid tags:

```
tag_name
"tag 1"
"tag 2"
"tag 3"
"tag 4"
```

To reference it as a table, the following configuration must be set for the file `valid_tags.csv`.

```
enrichment_tables:
  valid_tag_table:
    type: file
    file:
      path: /etc/vector/valid_tags.csv
      encoding:
        type: csv
    schema:
      tag_name: string
```

Once the `enrichment_tables` field is set, you can drop tags not included in the `valid_tags.csv` file using the following configuration:

```yaml
transforms:
  drop_excluded_tags:
    type: remap
    inputs:
      - dd_agent.metrics
    source: |2+
           # filter and drop any tags that don't match the tags in tags_to_keep
           .tags = [filter(.tags) -> |_index, value| {!is_empty(find_enrichment_table_records(valid_tag_table, value))}
```

> ## Prevent cardinality spikes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prevent tag cardinality spikes
```

### Problem

> Your overall volume of custom metrics is dependent on the number of tag value combinations submitted to Datadog. See [Custom Metrics Billing][8] to learn how custom metrics are counted. It is possible for a particular tag key's cardinality to unintentionally spike. For example, the `path` tag usually has 100 unique tag values, but then suddenly spikes to 100,000 unique values. This sudden increase in tag cardinality can cause an increase in your overall custom metrics volumes. It can also potentially cause you to exceed your account allotment for custom metrics. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your overall volume of custom metrics is dependent on the number of tag value combinations submitted to Datadog. See [Custom Metrics Billing][8] to learn how custom metrics are counted. It is possible for a particular tag key's cardinality to unintentionally spike. For example, the `path` tag usually has 100 unique tag values, but then suddenly spikes to 10,000 unique values. This sudden increase in tag cardinality can cause an increase in your overall custom metrics volumes. It can also potentially cause you to exceed your account allotment for custom metrics. 
```
